Reorganize HIP runtime API how-to (#3622)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/host_memory.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the host memory of the HIP ecosystem
                ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, host memory

.. _host_memory:

********************************************************************************
Host memory
********************************************************************************

> Host memory where on the host (e.g. CPU) of the machine in random access memory
> (RAM). The host memory has three different main types in HIP:
> 
> * Pageable memory
> * Pinned memory
> * Unified Memory

Reviewer: Saying the host memory has three different "types" makes it sound as if it was different hardware. Also pageable and pinned/non-pageable memory are not exclusive to HIP or CUDA, that's a general concept.
```suggestion
Host memory is "normal" memory as allocated by C or C++, and resides in the RAM of the host.
Host memory can be allocated in two different ways:

* Pageable memory
* Pinned memory
```

Also unified memory is not something that's only related to host memory, it should get its own section

These different types of memory should be used at different use cases. The
pageable and pinned memory using explicit memory management, where the
developers have direct control over memory operations, while at the unified
memory case the developer gets a simplified memory model with less control over
low level memory operations.

The data transfer differences between the pageable or pinned memory usage

> represented in the next figure.

Reviewer: It should be introduced first, that there is a (performance) difference in the memory transfer between pageable and pinned memory.

Author: Added to separate issue.

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/pageable_pinned.svg

> The unified memory management and explicit memory management main difference
> highlighted at the following figure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference between memory transfers of explicit memory management and unified memory management are highlighted in the following figure.
```

This should be added to the unified memory chapter, not host memory.

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory/um.svg

> The unified memory management described at the :doc:`/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unified memory management is described further in :doc:`/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory`.
```
But again, unified memory belongs into its own chapter. The reference would belong to the memory management landing page

Pageable memory
================================================================================

> Pageable memory is exists on "pages" (blocks of memory), which can be

Reviewer: Non-pageable(pinned) memory is also partitioned into pages :D

Author: Going to separate issue.

migrated to other memory storage. For example, migrating memory between CPU
sockets on a motherboard, or a system that runs out of space in RAM and starts
dumping pages of RAM into the swap partition of your hard drive.

Pageable memory is usually gotten when calling ``malloc`` or ``new`` in a C++
application. The following example shows the pageable host memory usage in HIP.

.. code-block:: cpp

>   #define ELEMENT_NUMBER 100

Reviewer: Please no defines for constants in c++. This doesn't even need to be a constant, as it's dynamically allocating memory

Author: You mean, we do not need compile-time variable. I put it into a simple variable.

  int *host_input, *host_output;
  // Host allocation
  host_input  = new int[ELEMENT_NUMBER];
  host_output = new int[ELEMENT_NUMBER];

  // Host data preparation
  for (int i = 0; i < ELEMENT_NUMBER; i++) {
    host_input[i] = i;
  }
  memset(host_output, 0, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));

  int *device_input, *device_output;

  // Device allocation
  hipMalloc((int **)&device_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));
  hipMalloc((int **)&device_output, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));

  // Device data preparation
  hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int), cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);
  hipMemset()

  // Run the kernel

>   ...

Reviewer: This looks like it doesn't compile. Please verify the whole code block (The `hipFree`s below also have no arguments and are missing the `;`

Author: Fixed.

  hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int), cudaMemcpyDeviceToHost);

  // Free host memory
  delete[] host_input;
  delete[] host_output;

  // Free device memory
  hipFree()
  hipFree()

.. note::

  :cpp:func:`hipMalloc` and :cpp:func:`hipFree` are blocking calls, however, HIP

>   recently added non-blocking versions :cpp:func:`hipMallocAsync` and

Reviewer: Recently? Better not to mention time in documentation, rather "also provides" (or if you know at what rocm version they have been added, feel free to mention that here)

Author: Fixed

  :cpp:func:`hipFreeAsync` which take in a stream as an additional argument.

Pinned memory
================================================================================

Pinned memory (or page-locked memory, or non-pageable memory) is host memory
that is mapped into the address space of all GPUs, meaning that the pointer can

> be used on both host and device. Accessing host-resident pinned memory in device

Reviewer: This sounds like it is confusing it with unified memory. Pinned memory is not necessarily accessable by the same pointer on the host and the device, and is also not necessarily mapped to the address space of the GPU. I thought main reason for using pinned memory was to improve performance of host-device transfers, as DMA is only possible from pinned memory, so usually the runtime has to transfer pageable memory to a pinned memory location and only then can copy it to the device.

Pinned memory mainly means, that it can not be swapped out, and actually physically resides in RAM, if my understanding is correct

Author: Discuss at separate issue.

kernels is generally not recommended for performance, as it can force the data
to traverse the host-device interconnect (e.g. PCIe), which is much slower than
the on-device bandwidth (>40x on MI200).

Much like how a process can be locked to a CPU core by setting affinity, a
pinned memory allocator does this with the memory storage system. On multi-socket
systems it is important to ensure that pinned memory is located on the same
socket as the owning process, or else each cache line will be moved through the
CPU-CPU interconnect, thereby increasing latency and potentially decreasing

> bandwidth.

Reviewer: This is describing NUMA, not pinned memory

Author: Removed.

Advantage of pinned memory is the improved transfer times between host and
device. For transfer operations, such as :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy` or :cpp:func:`hipMemcpyAsync`,
using pinned memory instead of pageable memory on host can lead to a ~3x
improvement in bandwidth.

> Disadvantage of pinned memory that it reduces the available RAM for other
> operations, such as paging, which can negatively impact the overall performance
> of the host.

Reviewer: Paging/Swapping memory does not require RAM, but disk/swap space
```suggestion
The disadvantage of pinned memory is, that it reduces the available RAM for other
processes, which can negatively impact the overall performance of the host.
```

The example code how to use pinned memory in HIP showed at the following example.

.. code-block:: cpp

  #define ELEMENT_NUMBER 100

  int *host_input, *host_output;
  // Host allocation
  hipHostMalloc((int **)&host_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));
  hipHostMalloc((int **)&host_output, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));

  // Host data preparation
  for (int i = 0; i < ELEMENT_NUMBER; i++) {
    host_input[i] = i;
  }
  memset(host_output, 0, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));

  int *device_input, *device_output;

  // Device allocation
  hipMalloc((int **)&device_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));
  hipMalloc((int **)&device_output, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int));

  // Device data preparation
  hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, ELEMENT_NUMBER * sizeof(int), cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);

>   hipMemset()

Reviewer: Same as before: Please verify the whole code block

Author: Checked and fixed.

* ``hipHostMallocMapped``: Map the allocation into the address space for
  the current device, and the device pointer can be obtained with
  :cpp:func:`hipHostGetDevicePointer`.
* ``hipHostMallocNumaUser``: The flag to allow host memory allocation to
  follow Numa policy by user. Target of Numa policy is to select a CPU that is
  closest to each GPU. Numa distance is the measurement of how far between GPU
  and CPU devices.
* ``hipHostMallocWriteCombined``: Allocates the memory as write-combined. On
  some system configurations, write-combined allocation may be transferred
  faster across the PCI Express bus, however, could have low read efficiency by
  most CPUs. It's a good option for data transfer from host to device via mapped
  pinned memory.
* ``hipHostMallocCoherent``: Allocate fine-grained memory. Overrides
  ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For
  further details, check :ref:`coherence_control`.
* ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``: Allocate coarse-grained memory. Overrides
  ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For
  further details, check :ref:`coherence_control`.

> All allocation flags are independent and can be used in most of the combination

Reviewer: "most combinations" would mean, that they are not independent

Author: Fixed.

.. meta::
  :description: Host memory of the HIP ecosystem
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, host memory

.. _host_memory:

********************************************************************************
Host memory
********************************************************************************

Host memory is the "normal" memory residing in the host RAM and allocated by C
or C++. Host memory can be allocated in two different ways:

* Pageable memory
* Pinned memory

The following figure explains how data is transferred in pageable and pinned
memory.

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/pageable_pinned.svg

> The pageable and pinned memory allow developers to exercise direct control over

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pageable and pinned memory allow you to exercise direct control over
```

memory operations, which is known as explicit memory management. When using the

> unified memory, developers get a simplified memory model with less control over

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unified memory, you get a simplified memory model with less control over
```

low level memory operations.

The difference in memory transfers between explicit and unified memory

> management are highlighted in the following figure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
management is highlighted in the following figure:
```

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory/um.svg

For more details on unified memory management, see :doc:`/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory`.

.. _pageable_host_memory:

Pageable memory
================================================================================

Pageable memory exists on memory blocks known as "pages" that can be migrated to
other memory storage. For example, migrating memory between CPU sockets on a
motherboard or in a system whose RAM runs out of space and starts dumping pages
into the swap partition of the hard drive.

Pageable memory is usually allocated with a call to ``malloc`` or ``new`` in a
C++ application. 

> **Example:** Using pageable host memory in HIP:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example:** Using pageable host memory in HIP
```

  }

  int main()
  {
      const int element_number = 100;

      int *host_input, *host_output;
      // Host allocation
      host_input  = new int[element_number];
      host_output = new int[element_number];

      // Host data preparation
      for (int i = 0; i < element_number; i++) {
          host_input[i] = i;
      }
      memset(host_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int));

      int *device_input, *device_output;

      // Device allocation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_input,  element_number * sizeof(int)));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_output, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Device data preparation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemset(device_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Run the kernel
      // ...

      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));

      // Free host memory
      delete[] host_input;
      delete[] host_output;

      // Free device memory
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_input));
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_output));
  }

.. note::

>   :cpp:func:`hipMalloc` and :cpp:func:`hipFree` are blocking calls, however, HIP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :cpp:func:`hipMalloc` and :cpp:func:`hipFree` are blocking calls. However, HIP
```

  also provides non-blocking versions :cpp:func:`hipMallocAsync` and
  :cpp:func:`hipFreeAsync`, which require a stream as an additional argument.

.. _pinned_host_memory:

Pinned memory
================================================================================

Pinned memory or page-locked memory is stored in pages that are locked in specific sectors in RAM and can't be migrated. The pointer can be used on both
host and device. Accessing host-resident pinned memory in device kernels is
generally not recommended for performance, as it can force the data to traverse
the host-device interconnect such as PCIe, which is much slower than the on-device bandwidth.

> Advantage of pinned memory is the improved transfer times between host and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of pinned memory is the improved transfer time between host and
```

device. For transfer operations, such as :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy` or :cpp:func:`hipMemcpyAsync`,

> using pinned memory instead of pageable memory on host can lead to a three times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using pinned memory instead of pageable memory on the host can lead to a three times
```

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the host memory of the HIP ecosystem

>                 ROCm software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :description: Host memory of the HIP ecosystem
```

  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, host memory

.. _host_memory:

********************************************************************************
Host memory
********************************************************************************

> Host memory is "normal" memory as allocated by C or C++, and resides in the RAM of the host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Host memory is the "normal" memory residing in the host RAM and allocated by C or C++.
```

Host memory can be allocated in two different ways:

* Pageable memory
* Pinned memory

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The following figure explains how data is transferred in pageable and pinned memory.

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/pageable_pinned.svg
```

These different types of memory should be used at different use cases. The
pageable and pinned memory using explicit memory management, where the
developers have direct control over memory operations, while at the unified
memory case the developer gets a simplified memory model with less control over

> low level memory operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pageable and pinned memory allow developers to exercise direct control over memory operations, which is known as explicit memory management. When using the unified memory, developers get a simplified memory model with less control over
low level memory operations.

The difference in memory transfers between explicit and unified memory management are highlighted in the following figure:

.. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory/um.svg
```

The data transfer differences between the pageable or pinned memory usage

> represented in the next figure.

Reviewer 2: Remove this.

Author: Remvoed.

> .. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/pageable_pinned.svg

Reviewer 2: Remove this.

Author: Removed.

The difference between memory transfers of explicit memory management and unified memory management are highlighted in the following figure.

> .. figure:: ../../../data/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory/um.svg

Reviewer 2: Remove

Author: Removed.

> Unified memory management is described further in :doc:`/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details on unified memory management, see :doc:`/how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management/unified_memory`.
```

.. _pageable_host_memory:

Pageable memory
================================================================================

Pageable memory is exists on "pages" (blocks of memory), which can be
migrated to other memory storage. For example, migrating memory between CPU
sockets on a motherboard, or a system that runs out of space in RAM and starts

> dumping pages of RAM into the swap partition of your hard drive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pageable memory exists on memory blocks known as "pages" that can be migrated to other memory storage. For example, migrating memory between CPU sockets on a motherboard or in a system whose RAM runs out of space and starts dumping pages into the swap partition of the hard drive.
```

Pageable memory is usually gotten when calling ``malloc`` or ``new`` in a C++

> application. The following example shows the pageable host memory usage in HIP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pageable memory is usually allocated with a call to ``malloc`` or ``new`` in a C++
application. 

**Example:** Using pageable host memory in HIP:
```

      host_output = new int[element_number];

      // Host data preparation
      for (int i = 0; i < element_number; i++) {
          host_input[i] = i;
      }
      memset(host_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int));

      int *device_input, *device_output;

      // Device allocation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_input,  element_number * sizeof(int)));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_output, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Device data preparation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemset(device_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Run the kernel
      // ...

      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));

      // Free host memory
      delete[] host_input;
      delete[] host_output;

      // Free device memory
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_input));
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_output));
  }

.. note::

  :cpp:func:`hipMalloc` and :cpp:func:`hipFree` are blocking calls, however, HIP
  also provides non-blocking versions :cpp:func:`hipMallocAsync` and

>   :cpp:func:`hipFreeAsync` which take in a stream as an additional argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :cpp:func:`hipMalloc` and :cpp:func:`hipFree` are blocking calls, however, HIP
  also provides non-blocking versions :cpp:func:`hipMallocAsync` and
  :cpp:func:`hipFreeAsync`, which require a stream as an additional argument.
```

.. _pinned_host_memory:

Pinned memory
================================================================================

Pinned memory (or page-locked memory) is stored in pages that are locked to
specific sectors in RAM and cannot be migrated. The pointer can be used on both
host and device. Accessing host-resident pinned memory in device kernels is
generally not recommended for performance, as it can force the data to traverse
the host-device interconnect (e.g. PCIe), which is much slower than

> the on-device bandwidth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pinned memory or page-locked memory is stored in pages that are locked in specific sectors in RAM and can't be migrated. The pointer can be used on both
host and device. Accessing host-resident pinned memory in device kernels is
generally not recommended for performance, as it can force the data to traverse
the host-device interconnect such as PCIe, which is much slower than the on-device bandwidth.
```

Advantage of pinned memory is the improved transfer times between host and
device. For transfer operations, such as :cpp:func:`hipMemcpy` or :cpp:func:`hipMemcpyAsync`,

> using pinned memory instead of pageable memory on host can lead to a ~3x

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using pinned memory instead of pageable memory on host can lead to a three times
```

improvement in bandwidth.

The disadvantage of pinned memory is, that it reduces the available RAM for other

> processes, which can negatively impact the overall performance of the host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The disadvantage of pinned memory is the reduced availability of RAM for other processes, which can negatively impact the overall performance of the host.
```

> The example code how to use pinned memory in HIP showed at the following example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example:** Using pinned memory in HIP
```

      HIP_CHECK(hipHostMalloc((int **)&host_output, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Host data preparation
      for (int i = 0; i < element_number; i++) {
          host_input[i] = i;
      }
      memset(host_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int));

      int *device_input, *device_output;

      // Device allocation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_input,  element_number * sizeof(int)));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc((int **)&device_output, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Device data preparation
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));
      HIP_CHECK(hipMemset(device_output, 0, element_number * sizeof(int)));

      // Run the kernel
      // ...

      HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(device_input, host_input, element_number * sizeof(int), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));

      // Free host memory
      delete[] host_input;
      delete[] host_output;

      // Free device memory
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_input));
      HIP_CHECK(hipFree(device_output));
  }

The pinned memory allocation is effected with different flags, which details

> described at :ref:`memory_allocation_flags`.

Reviewer 2: Remove.

Author: Removed.

.. _memory_allocation_flags:

> Memory allocation flags of pinned memory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memory allocation flags for pinned memory
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The ``hipHostMalloc`` flags specify different memory allocation types for pinned

> host memory:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The memory allocation for pinned memory can be controlled using ``hipHostMalloc`` flags:
```

* ``hipHostMallocPortable``: The memory is considered allocated by all contexts,
  not just the one on which the allocation is made.
* ``hipHostMallocMapped``: Map the allocation into the address space for
  the current device, and the device pointer can be obtained with
  :cpp:func:`hipHostGetDevicePointer`.
* ``hipHostMallocNumaUser``: The flag to allow host memory allocation to
  follow Numa policy by user. Target of Numa policy is to select a CPU that is
  closest to each GPU. Numa distance is the measurement of how far between GPU

>   and CPU devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``hipHostMallocPortable``: The memory allocation is not restricted to the context making the allocation.
* ``hipHostMallocMapped``: The memory is allocated into the address space for the current device and the device pointer can be obtained with :cpp:func:`hipHostGetDevicePointer`.
* ``hipHostMallocNumaUser``: The host memory allocation follows Numa policy specified by the user. Target of Numa policy is to select a CPU that is closest to each GPU. Numa distance is the distance between GPU and CPU devices.
```

* ``hipHostMallocWriteCombined``: Allocates the memory as write-combined. On
  some system configurations, write-combined allocation may be transferred
  faster across the PCI Express bus, however, could have low read efficiency by
  most CPUs. It's a good option for data transfer from host to device via mapped
  pinned memory.
* ``hipHostMallocCoherent``: Allocate fine-grained memory. Overrides
  ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For
  further details, check :ref:`coherence_control`.
* ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``: Allocate coarse-grained memory. Overrides
  ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For

>   further details, check :ref:`coherence_control`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``hipHostMallocWriteCombined``: The memory is allocated as write-combined. Although lacking read efficiency by most CPUs, write-combined allocation might be transferred faster across the PCIe bus on some system configurations. It's a good option for data transfer from host to device via mapped pinned memory.
* ``hipHostMallocCoherent``: Fine-grained memory is allocated. Overrides ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For details, see :ref:`coherence_control`.
* ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent``: Coarse-grained memory is allocated. Overrides ``HIP_HOST_COHERENT`` environment variable for specific allocation. For details, see :ref:`coherence_control`.
```

All allocation flags are independent and can be used in any of the combinations
with on exception. For example, :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` can be called with both
``hipHostMallocPortable`` and ``hipHostMallocMapped`` flags set. Both usage
models described above use the same allocation flags, and the difference is in
how the surrounding code uses the host memory.

The one exception is when the ``hipHostMallocCoherent`` and

> ``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` flags are set, what is an illegal state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All allocation flags are independent and can be set in any combination. The only exception is setting ``hipHostMallocCoherent`` and
``hipHostMallocNonCoherent`` together, which leads to an illegal state.
An example of a valid flag combination is calling :cpp:func:`hipHostMalloc` with both
``hipHostMallocPortable`` and ``hipHostMallocMapped`` flags set. Both the flags use the same model and differentiate only between
how the surrounding code uses the host memory.
```

.. note:: 
  
  By default, each GPU selects a Numa CPU node that has the least Numa distance
  between them, that is, host memory will be automatically allocated closest on
  the memory pool of Numa node of the current GPU device. Using
  :cpp:func:`hipSetDevice` API to a different GPU will still be able to access

>   the host allocation, but can have longer Numa distance. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  By default, each GPU selects a Numa CPU node with the least Numa distance between them. This implies that the host memory is automatically allocated on the closest memory pool of the current GPU device's Numa node. Using
:cpp:func:`hipSetDevice` API to set a different GPU increases the Numa distance but still allows you to access the host allocation.
```
